# Overview of Nitrogen Metabolism

 The biosynthetic pathways leading to amino acids and 
nucleotides share a requirement for nitrogen. Because 
soluble, biologically useful nitrogen compounds are generally scarce in natural environments, most organisms 
maintain strict economy in their use of ammonia, amino 
acids, and nucleotides. Indeed, as we shall see, free  amino acids, purines, and pyrimidines formed during 
metabolic turnover of proteins and nucleic acids are 
often salvaged and reused. We first examine the path
ways by which nitrogen from the environment is introduced into biological systems.

## The Nitrogen Cycle Maintains a Pool of Biologically Available Nitrogen

 Although Earths atmosphere is four-fifths molecular 
nitrogen (N2), relatively few species can convert this 
atmospheric nitrogen into forms useful to living organ
isms. In the biosphere, the metabolic processes of differ
ent species function interdependently to salvage and 
reuse biologically available nitrogen in a vast nitrogen 
cycle (Fig. 22–1). The first step in the cycle is fixation 
(reduction) of atmospheric nitrogen by nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria to yield ammonia (NH3 or NH4). Although 
ammonia can be used by most living organisms, soil bacteria that derive their energy by oxidizing ammonia to 
nitrite (NO2) and ultimately nitrate (NO3) are so abundant and active that nearly all ammonia reaching the soil 
is oxidized to nitrate. This process is known as nitrification. Plants and many bacteria can take up and readily 
reduce nitrate and nitrite to ammonia through the action 
of nitrate and nitrite reductases. This ammonia is incorporated into amino acids by plants. Animals then use 
plants as a source of amino acids, both nonessential and 
essential, to build their proteins. When organisms die, 
microbial degradation of their proteins returns ammonia 
to the soil, where nitrifying bacteria again convert it to 
nitrite and nitrate. A balance is maintained between 
fixed nitrogen and atmospheric nitrogen by bacteria that 
reduce nitrate to N2 under anaerobic conditions, a process called denitrification (Fig. 22–1). These soil bacteria use NO3 rather than O2 as the ultimate electron 
acceptor in a series of reactions that (like oxidative 
phosphorylation) generates a transmembrane proton 
gradient, which is used to synthesize ATP.

 The nitrogen cycle is short-circuited by a group of 
bacteria that promote anaerobic ammonia oxidation, or 
anammox (Fig. 22–1), a process that converts ammonia and nitrite to N2. As much as 50% to 70% of the NH3-to-N2 conversion in the biosphere may occur 
through this pathway, undetected until the 1980s. The 
obligate anaerobes that promote anammox are fascinating in their own right and are providing some useful 
solutions to waste-treatment problems (Box 22–1).

 Now lets examine the processes that generate the 
ammonia that is incorporated into microorganisms, 
plants, and the animals that eat them.

 More than 90% of the NH4 generated by vascular 
plants, algae, and microorganisms comes from nitrate 
assimilation, a two-step process. First NO3 is reduced to 
NO2 by nitrate reductase, then the NO2 is reduced to 
NH4 in a six-electron transfer catalyzed by nitrite 
reductase (Fig. 22–2). Both reactions involve chains 
of electron carriers and cofactors we have not yet 
encountered. Nitrate reductase is a large, soluble protein (Mr 220,000). Within the enzyme, a pair of electrons, donated by NADH, flows through —SH groups of 
cysteine, FAD, and a cytochrome (cyt b557), then to a 
novel cofactor containing molybdenum, before reducing 
the substrate NO3 to NO2.
 The nitrite reductase of plants is located in the 
chloroplasts and receives its electrons from ferredoxin 
(which is reduced in the light-dependent reactions of 
photosynthesis; see Section 19.8). Six electrons, donated one at a time by ferredoxin, pass through a 4S-4Fe 
center in the enzyme, then through a novel heme-like 
molecule (siroheme) before reducing NO2 to NH4 
(Fig. 22–2). In nonphotosynthetic microbes, NADPH 
provides the electrons for this reaction.

## Nitrogen Is Fixed by Enzymes of the Nitrogenase Complex

 Only certain bacteria and archaea can fix atmospheric 
N2. These organisms, called diazotrophs, include the 
cyanobacteria of soils and fresh and salt waters, methanogenic archaea (strict anaerobes that obtain energy 
and carbon by converting H2 and CO2 to methane), other 
kinds of free-living soil bacteria such as Azotobacter species, and the nitrogen-fixing bacteria that live as symbionts in the root nodules of leguminous plants. The first 
important product of nitrogen fixation is ammonia, which can be used by all organisms either directly or 
after its conversion to other soluble compounds such as 
nitrites, nitrates, or amino acids.

 The reduction of nitrogen to ammonia is an exergonic reaction:
 N2 1 3H2 ¡ 2NH3  
G98 5 233.5 kJ/mol

 The N;N triple bond, however, is very stable, with a 
bond energy of 930 kJ/mol. Nitrogen fixation therefore 
has an extremely high activation energy, and atmospheric nitrogen is almost chemically inert under nor
mal conditions. Ammonia is produced industrially by 
the Haber process (named for its inventor, Fritz Haber), 
which requires temperatures of 400 to 500 8C and nitro
gen and hydrogen at pressures of tens of thousands of 
kilopascals (several hundred atmospheres) to provide 
the necessary activation energy. Biological nitrogen 
fixation, however, must occur at biological temperatures and at 0.8 atm of nitrogen, and the high activation 
barrier is overcome by other means. This is accomplished, at least in part, by the binding and hydrolysis of 
ATP. The overall reaction can be written
 N2 1 10H1 18e2 116ATP ¡
 2NH1
 4 1 16ADP 1 16Pi 1 H2

 Biological nitrogen fixation is carried out by a highly 
conserved complex of proteins called the nitrogenase 
complex; its central components are dinitrogenase 
reductase and dinitrogenase (Fig. 22–3a). Dinitrogenase reductase (Mr 60,000) is a dimer of two identical 
subunits. It contains a single 4Fe-4S redox center (see 
Fig. 19–5), bound between the subunits, and can be 
oxidized and reduced by one electron. It also has two binding sites for ATP/ADP (one site on each subunit). 
Dinitrogenase (Mr 240,000), an 2 2 tetramer, has two 
Fe-containing cofactors that transfer electrons (Fig. 
22–3b). One, the P cluster, has a pair of 4Fe-4S centers; 
these share a sulfur atom, making an 8Fe-7S center. The 
second cofactor in dinitrogenase, the FeMo cofactor, is 
a novel structure composed of 7 Fe atoms, 9 inorganic S 
atoms, a Cys side chain, and a single carbon atom in the 
center of the FeS cluster. Also part of the cofactor is a 
molybdenum atom, with ligands that include three inorganic S atoms, a His side chain, and two oxygen atoms 
from a molecule of homocitrate that is an intrinsic part 
of the FeMo cofactor. There is also a form of nitrogenase 
that contains vanadium rather than molybdenum, and 
some bacterial species can produce both types. The 
vanadium-containing enzyme may be the primary 
nitrogen-fixing system under some conditions. The 
vanadium nitrogenase of Azotobacter vinelandii has the 
remarkable capacity to catalyze the reduction of carbon 
monoxide (CO) to ethylene (C2H4), ethane, and propane. 

Nitrogen fixation is carried out by a highly reduced 
form of dinitrogenase and requires eight electrons: six 
for the reduction of N2 and two to produce one molecule 
of H2. Production of H2 is an obligate part of the reaction 
mechanism, but its biological role in the process is not 
understood. 

Dinitrogenase is reduced by the transfer of electrons from dinitrogenase reductase (Fig. 22–4). The 
dinitrogenase tetramer has two binding sites for the 
reductase. The required eight electrons are transferred 
from reductase to dinitrogenase one at a time: a reduced 
reductase molecule binds to the dinitrogenase and 
transfers a single electron, then the oxidized reductase dissociates from dinitrogenase, in a repeating cycle. 
Each turn of the cycle requires the hydrolysis of two 
ATP molecules by the dimeric reductase. The immediate 
source of electrons to reduce dinitrogenase reductase 
varies, with reduced ferredoxin (see Section 19.8), 
reduced flavodoxin, and perhaps other sources playing a 
role. In at least one species, the ultimate source of electrons to reduce ferredoxin is pyruvate (Fig. 22–4).

 The role of ATP in this process is somewhat unusual. 
Recall that ATP can contribute not only chemical energy, 
through the hydrolysis of one or more of its phosphoanhydride bonds, but also binding energy (p. 195), 
through noncovalent interactions that lower the activation energy. In the reaction carried out by dinitrogenase 
reductase, both ATP binding and ATP hydrolysis bring 
about protein conformational changes that help over
come the high activation energy of nitrogen fixation. The 
binding of two ATP molecules to the reductase shifts the 
reduction potential (E98) of this protein from 2300 to 
2420 mV, an enhancement of its reducing power that is  required to transfer electrons through dinitrogenase to 
N2; the standard reduction potential for the half-reaction 
N2 1 6H 1 6e¡ 2NH3 is 20.34 V. The ATP molecules are then hydrolyzed just before the actual transfer 
of one electron to dinitrogenase.

 ATP binding and hydrolysis change the conformation of nitrogenase reductase in two regions, which are 
structurally homologous with switch 1 and switch 2 
regions of the GTP-binding proteins involved in biological signaling (see Box 12–2). ATP binding produces a 
conformational change that brings the 4Fe-4S center of 
the reductase closer to the P cluster of dinitrogenase 
(from 18 Å to 14 Å away), which facilitates electron 
transfer between the reductase and dinitrogenase. The 
details of electron transfer from the P cluster to the 
FeMo cofactor, and the means by which eight electrons 
are accumulated by nitrogenase, are not known, nor are 
the intermediates in the reaction known with certainty; 
two reasonable hypotheses are being tested, both 
involving the Mo atom as a central player (Fig. 22–5).

 The nitrogenase complex is remarkably unstable in 
the presence of oxygen. The reductase is inactivated in 
air, with a half-life of 30 seconds; dinitrogenase has a 
half-life of only 10 minutes in air. Free-living bacteria 
that fix nitrogen cope with this problem in a variety of 
ways. Some live only anaerobically or repress nitrogenase synthesis when oxygen is present. Some aerobic 
species, such as Azotobacter vinelandii, partially 
uncouple electron transfer from ATP synthesis so that 
oxygen is burned off as rapidly as it enters the cell (see 
Box 19–1). When fixing nitrogen, cultures of these bacteria actually increase in temperature as a result of their 
efforts to rid themselves of oxygen.

 The symbiotic relationship between leguminous 
plants and the nitrogen-fixing bacteria in their root nod
ules (Fig. 22–6) takes care of both the energy requirements and the oxygen lability of the nitrogenase complex. 
The energy required for nitrogen fixation was probably 
the evolutionary driving force for this plant-bacteria association. The bacteria in root nodules have access to a large reservoir of energy in the form of abundant carbohydrate 
and citric acid cycle intermediates made available by the 
plant. This may allow the bacteria to fix hundreds of times 
more nitrogen than do their free-living cousins under  conditions generally encountered in soils. To solve the 
oxygen-toxicity problem, the bacteria in root nodules are 
bathed in a solution of the oxygen-binding heme protein 
leghemoglobin, produced by the plant (although the 
heme may be contributed by the bacteria). Leghemoglobin binds all available oxygen so that it cannot interfere 
with nitrogen fixation, and efficiently delivers the oxygen 
to the bacterial electron-transfer system. The benefit to 
the plant, of course, is a ready supply of reduced nitro
gen. In fact, the bacterial symbionts typically produce far 
more NH3 than is needed by their symbiotic partner; the 
excess is released into the soil. The efficiency of the symbiosis between plants and bacteria is evident in the 
enrichment of soil nitrogen brought about by leguminous 
plants. This enrichment of NH3 in the soil is the basis of 
crop rotation methods, in which plantings of nonleguminous plants (such as maize) that extract fixed nitrogen 
from the soil are alternated every few years with plantings of legumes such as alfalfa, peas, or clover.

 Nitrogen fixation is energetically costly: 16 ATP and 
8 electron pairs yield only 2 NH3. It is therefore not surprising that the process is tightly regulated, so that NH3 is 
produced only when needed. High [ADP], an indicator of 
low [ATP], is a strong inhibitor of nitrogenase. NH4 
represses the expression of the 
20 nitrogen fixation 
(nif ) genes, effectively shutting down the pathway. 
Covalent alteration of nitrogenase is also used in some 
diazotrophs to control nitrogen fixation in response to the 
availability of NH4 in the surroundings. Transfer of an 
ADP-ribosyl group from NADH to a specific Arg residue in 
the nitrogenase reductase shuts down N2 fixation in Rhodospirillum, for example. This is the same covalent 
modification that we saw in the case of G protein inhibition by the toxins of cholera and pertussis (see Box 12–2).

 Nitrogen fixation is the subject of intense study 
because of its immense practical importance. Industrial 
production of ammonia for use in fertilizers requires a 
large and expensive input of energy, and this has 
spurred a drive to develop recombinant or transgenic 
organisms that can fix nitrogen. In principle, recombinant DNA techniques (Chapter 9) might be used to 
transfer the DNA that encodes the enzymes of nitrogen 
fixation into non-nitrogen-fixing bacteria and plants. 
However, those genes alone will not suffice. About 20 
genes are essential to nitrogenase activity in bacteria, 
many of them needed for the synthesis, assembly, and 
insertion of the cofactors. There is also the problem of 
protecting the enzyme in its new setting from destruction by oxygen. In all, there are formidable challenges in 
engineering new nitrogen-fixing plants. Success in 
these efforts will depend on overcoming the problem of 
oxygen toxicity in any cell that produces nitrogenase.

## Ammonia Is Incorporated into Biomolecules through Glutamate and Glutamine

 Reduced nitrogen in the form of NH4 is assimilated into 
amino acids and then into other nitrogen-containing bio
molecules. Two amino acids, glutamate and glutamine, provide the critical entry point. Recall that these same 
two amino acids play central roles in the catabolism of 
ammonia and amino groups in amino acid oxidation 
(Chapter 18). Glutamate is the source of amino groups for 
most other amino acids, through transamination reactions 
(the reverse of the reaction shown in Fig. 18–4). The 
amide nitrogen of glutamine is a source of amino groups 
in a wide range of biosynthetic processes. In most types of 
cells, and in extracellular fluids in higher organisms, one 
or both of these amino acids are present at higher concentrations—sometimes an order of magnitude or more 
higher—than other amino acids. An Escherichia coli cell 
requires so much glutamate that this amino acid is one of 
the primary solutes in the cytosol. Its concentration is 
regulated not only in response to the cells nitrogen 
requirements but also to maintain an osmotic balance 
between the cytosol and the external medium.

 The biosynthetic pathways to glutamate and glutamine are simple, and all or some of the steps occur in most 
organisms. The most important pathway for the assimilation of NH4 into glutamate requires two reactions. First, 
glutamine synthetase catalyzes the reaction of glutamate and NH4 to yield glutamine. This reaction takes 
place in two steps, with enzyme-bound -glutamyl phosphate as an intermediate (see Fig. 18–8):
 (1) 
(2)  
Glutamate 1 ATP ¡ -glutamyl phosphate 1 ADP-Glutamyl phosphate 1 NH4 ¡ 
glutamine 1 Pi 1 H
 Sum: Glutamate 1 NH4 1 ATP ¡ 
 glutamine 1 ADP 1 Pi 1 H (22–1)
 Glutamine synthetase is found in all organisms. In addition to its importance for NH4 assimilation in bacteria, it 
has a central role in amino acid metabolism in mammals, 
converting free NH4, which is toxic, to glutamine for 
transport in the blood (Chapter 18).

 In bacteria and plants, glutamate is produced from 
glutamine in a reaction catalyzed by glutamate synthase. (An alternative name for this enzyme, glutamate:
 oxoglutarate aminotransferase, yields the acronym 
GOGAT, by which the enzyme also is known.) -Ketoglutarate, an intermediate of the citric acid cycle, undergoes 
reductive amination with glutamine as nitrogen donor:-Ketoglutarate 1 glutamine 1 NADPH 1 H ¡ 
 2 glutamate 1 NADP
 (22–2)
 The net reaction of glutamine synthetase and glutamate 
synthase (Eqns 22–1 and 22–2) is-Ketoglutarate 1 NH4 1 NADPH 1 ATP ¡ 
L-glutamate 1 NADP 1 ADP 1 Pi

 Glutamate synthase is not present in animals, which 
instead maintain high levels of glutamate by processes 
such as the transamination of -ketoglutarate during 
amino acid catabolism.

 Glutamate can also be formed in yet another, albeit 
minor, pathway: the reaction of -ketoglutarate and 
NH4 to form glutamate in one step. This is catalyzed by 
 L-glutamate dehydrogenase, an enzyme present in all 
organisms. Reducing power is furnished by NADPH:-Ketoglutarate 1 NH4 1 NADPH ¡ 
L-glutamate 1 NADP 1 H2O

 We encountered this reaction in the catabolism of amino 
acids (see Fig. 18–7). In eukaryotic cells, L-glutamate 
dehydrogenase is located in the mitochondrial matrix. 
The reaction equilibrium favors the reactants, and the Km 
for NH4 ( 1 mM) is so high that the reaction probably 
makes only a modest contribution to NH4 assimilation 
into amino acids and other metabolites. (Recall that the 
glutamate dehydrogenase reaction, in reverse (see Fig. 
18–10), is one source of NH4 destined for the urea 
cycle.) Concentrations of NH4 high enough for the gluta
mate dehydrogenase reaction to make a significant contribution to glutamate levels generally occur only when 
NH3 is added to the soil or when organisms are grown in 
a laboratory in the presence of high NH3 concentrations. 
In general, soil bacteria and plants rely on the two
enzyme pathway outlined above (Eqns. 22–1, 22–2).

## Glutamine Synthetase Is a Primary Regulatory Point in Nitrogen Metabolism

 The activity of glutamine synthetase is regulated in virtually all organisms—as expected, given its central metabolic role as an entry point for reduced nitrogen. In 
enteric bacteria such as E. coli, the regulation is unusually complex. Type I enzyme (from bacteria) has 12 
identical subunits of Mr 50,000 (Fig. 22–7) and is regulated both allosterically and by covalent modification. 
(Type II enzyme, from eukaryotes and some bacteria, 
has 10 identical subunits.) Alanine, glycine, and at least  six end products of glutamine metabolism are allosteric 
inhibitors of the enzyme (Fig. 22–8). Each inhibitor 
alone produces only partial inhibition, but the effects of 
multiple inhibitors are more than additive, and all eight 
together virtually shut down the enzyme. This is an 
example of cumulative feedback inhibition. This control 
mechanism provides a constant adjustment of glutamine 
levels to match immediate metabolic requirements.

 Superimposed on the allosteric regulation is inhibition by adenylylation of (addition of AMP to) Tyr397, 
located near the enzymes active site (Fig. 22–9). This 
covalent modification increases sensitivity to the allosteric inhibitors, and activity decreases as more sub
units are adenylylated. Both adenylylation and deadenylylation are promoted by adenylyltransferase (AT 
in Fig. 22–9), part of a complex enzymatic cascade that 
responds to levels of glutamine, -ketoglutarate, ATP, 
and Pi. The activity of adenylyltransferase is modulated 
by binding to a regulatory protein called PII, and the 
activity of PII, in turn, is regulated by covalent modification (uridylylation), again at a Tyr residue. The adenylyltransferase complex with uridylylated PII (PII-UMP) 
stimulates deadenylylation, whereas the same complex 
with deuridylylated PII stimulates adenylylation of glutamine synthetase. Both uridylylation and deuridylylation 
of PII are brought about by a single enzyme, uridylyl
transferase. Uridylylation is inhibited by binding of 
glutamine and Pi to uridylyltransferase and is stimulated 
by binding of -ketoglutarate and ATP to PII.

 The regulation does not stop there. The uridylylated 
PII also mediates the activation of transcription of the 
gene encoding glutamine synthetase, thus increasing the 
cellular concentration of the enzyme; the deuridylylated 
PII brings about a decrease in transcription of the same 
gene. This mechanism involves an interaction of PII 
with additional proteins involved in gene regulation, of 
a type described in Chapter 28. The net result of this 
elaborate system of controls is a decrease in glutamine 
synthetase activity when glutamine levels are high, and 
an increase in activity when glutamine levels are low 
and -ketoglutarate and ATP (substrates for the synthetase reaction) are available. The multiple layers of 
regulation permit a sensitive response in which glutamine synthesis is tailored to cellular needs.

## Several Classes of Reactions Play Special Roles in the Biosynthesis of Amino Acids and Nucleotides

 The pathways described in this chapter include a variety 
of interesting chemical rearrangements. Several of these 
recur and deserve special note before we progress to the 
pathways themselves. These are (1) transamination reactions and other rearrangements promoted by enzymes 
containing pyridoxal phosphate; (2) transfer of one-car
bon groups, with either tetrahydrofolate (usually at the 
—CHO and —CH2OH oxidation levels) or S-adenosylme
thionine (at the —CH3 oxidation level) as cofactor; and 
(3) transfer of amino groups derived from the amide 
nitrogen of glutamine. Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), tetrahydrofolate (H4 folate), and S-adenosylmethionine 
(adoMet) are described in some detail in Chapter 18 (see  Figs 18–6, 18–17, and 18–18). Here we focus on amino 
group transfer involving the amide nitrogen of glutamine.

 More than a dozen known biosynthetic reactions use 
glutamine as the major physiological source of amino 
groups, and most of these occur in the pathways outlined 
in this chapter. As a class, the enzymes catalyzing these 
reactions are called glutamine amidotransferases. All 
have two structural domains: one binding glutamine, the 
other binding the second substrate, which serves as 
amino group acceptor (Fig. 22–10). A conserved Cys  residue in the glutamine-binding domain is believed to act 
as a nucleophile, cleaving the amide bond of glutamine 
and forming a covalent glutamyl-enzyme intermediate. 

The NH3 produced in this reaction is not released, but 
instead is transferred through an “ammonia channel” to a 
second active site, where it reacts with the second substrate to form the aminated product. The covalent inter
mediate is hydrolyzed to the free enzyme and glutamate. 
If the second substrate must be activated, the usual 
method is the use of ATP to generate an acyl phosphate 
intermediate (R—OX in Fig. 22–10, with X as a phosphoryl group). The enzyme glutaminase acts in a similar 
fashion but uses H2O as the second substrate, yielding 
NH4 and glutamate (see Fig. 18–8).

## SUMMARY 22.1 Overview of Nitrogen Metabolism

 The molecular nitrogen that makes up 80% of 
Earths atmosphere is unavailable to most living 
organisms until it is reduced. This fixation of 
atmospheric N2 takes place in certain free-living 
bacteria and in symbiotic bacteria in the root 
nodules of leguminous plants.

 In soil bacteria and vascular plants, the sequential 
action of nitrate reductase and nitrite reductase 
converts NO3 to NH3, which can be assimilated 
into nitrogen-containing compounds.

 The nitrogen cycle entails formation of ammonia by 
bacterial fixation of N2, nitrification of ammonia to 
nitrate by soil organisms, conversion of nitrate to 
ammonia by higher plants, synthesis of amino acids 
from ammonia by all organisms, and conversion of 
nitrate to N2 by denitrifying soil bacteria. The 
anammox bacteria anaerobically oxidize ammonia 
to nitrogen, using nitrite as an electron acceptor.

 Fixation of N2 as NH3 is carried out by the 
nitrogenase complex, in a reaction that requires 
large investments of ATP and of reducing power. The 
nitrogenase complex is highly labile in the presence of 
O2, and is subject to regulation by the supply of NH3.

 In living systems, reduced nitrogen is incorporated 
first into amino acids and then into a variety of 
other biomolecules, including nucleotides. The key 
entry point is the amino acid glutamate. Glutamate 
and glutamine are the nitrogen donors in a wide 
range of biosynthetic reactions. Glutamine 
synthetase, which catalyzes the formation of 
glutamine from glutamate, is a main regulatory 
enzyme of nitrogen metabolism.

 The amino acid and nucleotide biosynthetic 
pathways make repeated use of the biological 
cofactors pyridoxal phosphate, tetrahydrofolate, and 
S-adenosylmethionine. Pyridoxal phosphate is 
required for transamination reactions involving 
glutamate and for other amino acid transformations. 
One-carbon transfers require S-adenosylmethionine 
and tetrahydrofolate. Glutamine amidotransferases 
catalyze reactions that incorporate nitrogen derived 
from glutamine.